---
title: "A Personal Historical Revision"
author: "Osman Cakir"
date: 2018-12-02T11:53:49-07:00
description: "The past changes."
type: article
draft: false
---

[TL;DR]

* I studied Economics in my Bachelor and M.Sc. degrees. 
* I was planning to be in Academic in this field.
* I changed my mind at the Master's degree because I didn't like mainstream economics approach. 
* I learned coding while I was trying to figure out what to do next in my life. 
* I loved coding, 
* An opportunity has risen to jump on board at digitl art history research with the new acquired skill. 
* Got accepted - happyface.jpg


To be honest, I do not know exactly if I am writing this essay to make sense of my past. As the usual, I feel the need to sit down, take the pen in my hand and write, but don't know how to start or even how to plan what I am going to write. It is more like my past is forcing me to write this. Sounds a lot like a scene from the Looper(2012) film. In the film, Bruce Willis meets Joseph Gordon Lewitt in an American diner and they were the past and the future versions of the same person. When Lewitt changes something Willis feels a little bit dizzy and says his past gets a little bit blurry. Now I need to get rid of the dizziness about 3-4 years of my life. So let’s assume as a future-past version of my present, I went back to my past, tweaking events a bit. And present me orchestrating these changes between past me and future me without breaking my space-time continuum. Everything ends in the present! The past changes, the future changes but the present doesn't change! Welcome to my interpretation of time as a black hole. The present is the gravitational center of it. Every other time collides into it. And this is my historical revision according to this interpretation.

I felt lost at some point in time. I felt my story did not continue somehow. The events didn't appear to be in the true order. Let me try to start from my graduation date to explain this. On 29.06.2017, my university printed my master diploma on my birthday by coincidence. What a great surprise! A perfect timing for a fresh start to a new life. At that time, I was working in a small electronics wholesale company on contract. I was telling myself ‘to be open to opportunities’. Get a permanent job first and see how it is. What does life mean for a poor guy from a rural area in Turkey, right? Made it in Germany; graduated from a masters degree, found a job, able to spend generously when on vacation in Turkey because of the exchange rates between Turkish Lira and Euro. Then get a better paying job, maybe in an international company, with a higher ranked title and you know, climb the ladder. A Roman legionnaire in the 21st-century capitalism. Stay sharp, stay shiny in a suit. 

However, how appealing that suit may look, it felt itchy on me. I denied that it was itchy until I figured it out what was itching me. I kept telling myself for almost 7 months 'Come on Osman, you have to be open to opportunities, this path looks a very probable one for you. It will make you happy once you fit in.' I persisted on this idea mostly because I had a small notebook where I write my 'little dreams'. I write things like ‘have a coffee table that is fully covered with legos’, or ‘try every European breakfast in their home country’ kind of dreams into this notebook. And every day, I looked at that notebook and thought, all of the dreams I have written here is achievable if I find a decent job. But then how come I was not able to find a job? Yet finding a job, how come I was not able to make applications? Literally, I remember days I spent looking at job ads on LinkedIn, Xing, stepstone, indeed, etc. and updating my profiles over and over on them without sending out a single application.

When you are confused like this, you put the question as 'What should I do now about my life?'. This is not a question to ask to other people. No matter how helpful and supportive friends and family circle you have, they will not be able to help you. I tried to follow all of the advice I got but was not able to be determined at any. Failing to find a job created a downward spiral for my mood. Folks, feeling worthless, not being able to accomplish anything in 'real' life (like the life after your education is the real one) is not a good place to be. So I quitted trying to find a job. It would sound funny but I actually quitted trying to try to find a job. I avoided anyone asking me about my job search, and couldn't stand to any advice anymore. I went back to my books and films. I also was learning Python at that time. It was fun to me and I thought, even though I won't make any applications anymore, it will be useful when I feel ready to make applications. I was going to the library every day, enjoying at least 50 pages of a quality novel then listening to some online courses about coding and machine learning. This ritual brought a fresh air to my mind. I started to ask myself how did I get here? By here, I mean, to Germany? Let's go back to my graduation from my bachelor's degree. 

I remember one night specifically. Our graduation party at the beautiful Bosphorus. It was the year of the Gezi Parkı protests. I was discussing with my friends over the terrace what will we do now. I knew the path ahead of me. I wanted to become an academic. I was full of ideas. Eager to take in all the knowledge in economics, wanting to understand how my country, Turkey, could be modernized in its own way. I had a master plan. In my bachelor's degree, we had a more heterodox curriculum as we call it in economics. The most simple way to explain this is that our curriculum was a bit more critical to the majority of economics schools. We had a more interdisciplinary approach to economics and took courses from sociology, history, law and so on. We heard someone like Marx has existed unlike mainstream schools' students for example. Though how intellectually fulfilling this curriculum was to me, I realized, we learned the criticism to the mainstream economics research from critics but not from the source. So I decided, I will do a master's degree at one of the best universities in the world which taught the mainstream economics. Then I thought, I can understand the phenomenons better and become a good academic. I wanted to be the professor who can explain complex things in an intuitional way and inspires students by recommending them films, music, books, and art after classes. But again, what happened in the master's degree that I completely gave up on this dream? 

Throughout my student life, I was never worried about school. I enjoyed the extra freedom to do whatever I want to do and the appearance as the smart kid since my childhood from my family because of having good grades without much effort. And my hack to this success was that I enjoyed reading and learning. The ritual I mentioned earlier is the most successful commitment of my whole life. Reading at least 50 pages and learning my courses a bit afterward on a normal day earned me an approximately a 300 books library and 2nd highest GPA in my faculty during my bachelor studies. So I had pretty high confidence for my success here in the master's degree when I started. Sure enough, why I wasn't motivated to study at the master's degree was the trickiest question to understand for me. I was ready for the challenge, mentally, at least. But there was not a challenge, not in the sense of understanding some phenomena scientifically. There wasn't enough time for discussion. Every course was all about throwing 500 slides to students with lots of equations and expecting them to understand all of the derivations 2 weeks before the exams. And the exams were just a horse race, making the same kind of derivations with slightly different functions as fast as you can. No questioning, no creativity, no understanding of anything related to the world. I hated this. I also hated how the competition placed upon the students over their grades. My mind completely rejected this kind of curriculum and competition. But I did not see this. I was blind with the richness of the faculty. I thought the problem was about me back then. I was only able to stop this loss of energy and motivation at the point of not failing from my classes. That was the last line I drew to protect myself from a complete destruction. 

Alright now let's bring the pieces together. These are all going to make sense I promise. 

Do you remember the itchy feeling I felt when I try to find a job? That was because I did not have only 'little dreams' for my life. My 'bigger dreams' were haunting me without me consciously realizing it. I was never the cut for being competitive over paychecks and titles guy and trying to be one without wanting to be one just backfired and made me unhappy and confused. So I figured, you just can not apply to jobs only to have the time and the money after you are done at the office at 5 pm to do your 'little dreams' once you are employed. You have to have an interest in what you will do there. You have to know if you are a finance guy, accounting guy or project management guy, product management guy or marketing department guy or human resources guy, etc. You have to have a leastwise preference over industries. Do you want to work in the automotive industry or in IT or in startups or in consulting, etc? You have to have a basic idea for at least one of these and that interest would lead you to do something about it. Going to the related meet-ups, fairs, anything. If you don't have a drive like this, in my opinion, you can not handle the competition over there in the market. Then you will be only frustrated when you see a job advertisement. The same attitude, trying to be one without wanting to be one, over being part of the mainstream economics community pushed me over the cliff because that was a little bit more related to my bigger dream. I was never able to confess that I felt rejected by my dream to be an academician in economics. I was afraid of seeing myself failed. I thought, if I never think about this anymore and 'be open to new opportunities', it will just fade away from my memories. If you are someone like me, trying to be successful at something you have no interest doing will bring you the worst hell on earth. I try to be hesitant giving advice from now on, but believe me on this. I felt lost because I was not doing anything I enjoy anymore. I couldn't foresee a future where I can do what I like. I was just trying to find a place to hide in the industry to settle down for 'having that coffee table fully covered with legos'. Posing myself as someone who really wants to have any fancy job at any firm was what frustrated me when I was looking at job ads. This was against every principle I have about life. I had to stop this. And I stopped. The turn of events started right there. It was, still is, not easy. I have many challenges ahead of me. But once again I saw that there is not any door that honesty could not open. Even if it is just being honest with yourself.

One day, when I was again at the library, reading Robert M. Pirsig and thinking about how to secure my visa and start over my life again. Because I had only about 6 more months left on my 18 months job seeking visa. I could continue reading my novels and learning to code in the library but I can't just sit there to wait the day to be kicked out of Germany. Then, call it a miracle, a friend of mine mentioned about me to now my Ph.D. supervisor. He was interested in my projects in machine learning and wanted to meet. And the rest is beyond my imagination. Here I am writing these sentences as a Ph.D. student in Art History, working with art metadata to explore what digitalization could bring to Art History research. 

I just had my visa renewal yesterday.

Feels Good. Thank you my friends, thank you life!

